Examples
========

The repository ships committed sample trees under ``examples/``. This page
walks through ``examples/hello``, a minimal two-page wiki — data to inspect
rather than a script to run. It is the product of a ``wiki init`` scaffold,
one bare markdown page dropped beside the index, and the ``wiki update`` runs
that linked it in and propagated its authored ``desc:`` — and its files, read
end to end, cover the whole on-disk format.

The ``hello`` tree
------------------

.. code-block:: text

   examples/hello/
   ├── .wiki/
   │   └── settings.json
   ├── _index.md
   └── world.md

A wiki is a folder tree of markdown pages indexed at every level by
``_index.md`` files; ``hello`` is the smallest interesting instance — one
level, one index, one page. The ``.wiki/`` directory is the tool's namespace
at the root. The committed tree keeps only what the format requires; the
staged Obsidian configuration and the derived counts cache that ``wiki init``
and later runs produce are local by-products, not part of the sample.

The root index: ``_index.md``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/hello/_index.md
   :language: markdown

Every region of the format appears here:

- **Frontmatter** sits between ``---`` lines, in the canonical key order.
  ``name``, ``created``, and ``updated`` are tool-owned — ``name`` is derived
  from the path and ``wiki update`` rewrites it; the timestamps are stamped by
  the tool. ``title``, ``desc``, ``tags``, and ``sources`` are authored.
- **The H1 heading** reads ``# Hello`` because the authored ``title: Hello``
  wins over the path-derived name; without a title, the heading would be the
  name.
- **The link block** holds one generated row per entry in the folder, in the
  grammar ``[[target|label]]: description``. Targets are root-relative and
  drop the ``.md`` suffix, so ``world.md`` links as ``world``. In a wiki with
  subfolders, each folder gets a ``folder/`` row targeting its own
  ``_index.md``; see :doc:`/guide/structure`.
- **The** ``***`` **delimiter** is the ownership boundary: everything above it
  (minus the authored frontmatter keys) is generated and regenerated by
  ``wiki update``; everything below it is authored content the tool never
  touches.

The page: ``world.md``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/hello/world.md
   :language: markdown

A page carries the same frontmatter shape as an index but no link block and no
delimiter — everything below the frontmatter is authored body. Two things this
page demonstrates:

- **Desc propagation.** The index row's description and this page's ``desc:``
  are the same sentence, and that is not a coincidence: the page frontmatter
  is the source of truth, and ``wiki update`` copies it into the parent row.
  Editing the description in ``_index.md`` directly is futile — the next
  update overwrites it from the page.
- **Bare-page adoption.** The page began life as a plain markdown file with
  just a heading and a paragraph; the ``wiki update`` run adopted it — adding
  the frontmatter block, seeding ``title:`` from the authored H1 — and added
  the index row. The ``desc:`` started as the ``...`` placeholder and was
  authored afterwards.

The full page format, including every frontmatter field, is covered in
:doc:`/guide/pages`.

The root marker: ``.wiki/settings.json``
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. literalinclude:: ../examples/hello/.wiki/settings.json
   :language: json

This file plays two roles. It **declares the wiki root** — commands anywhere
inside the tree resolve the root by finding it, so no ``--path`` is needed
below ``examples/hello`` — and it holds the per-wiki settings. The committed
content is exactly what ``wiki init`` seeds: the default settings written out
in full so the knobs are discoverable. Every key here is a default; the file
behaves identically to ``{}``. All settings keys are documented in
:doc:`/configuration`.

Exploring the tree
------------------

The quickstart from ``examples/README.md``:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cd examples/hello
   $ wiki map
   world (<words>): The customary first page.

``wiki map`` renders the index rows, not a directory listing — one line per
entry, with the description from the link row and the page's body word count
in parentheses. The first run materializes ``.wiki/cache/word_counts.json``;
the cache directory writes its own ``.gitignore`` so the derived state never
appears as untracked noise, and deleting it is always safe. The companion
``--stat`` flag sizes the dump instead of printing it:

.. code-block:: console

   $ wiki map --stat
   1 line, <chars> chars, <words> words

``wiki read`` prints an entry verbatim (the name resolves by appending
``.md``), and ``wiki search`` greps body content — including the index's link
block, which is body — following the grep exit-code convention (0 match, 1 no
match, 2 error):

.. code-block:: console

   $ wiki read world
   ---
   name: world
   title: World
   ...
   $ wiki search customary --lines
   _index.md:<lineno>: [[world|world]]: The customary first page.
   world.md:<lineno>: The customary first page. Add more pages beside this one and run `wiki update`

The committed tree is fully converged, so the health checks come back clean:

.. code-block:: console

   $ wiki lint
   No issues found.
   $ wiki update --check
   Nothing to update.

``wiki lint`` exits 1 when it finds issues; ``wiki update --check`` is the dry
run, exiting 1 when a write run would change something. The full command
surface is documented under :doc:`/cli/index`.

Making a change
---------------

The committed example is data to inspect, so experiment on a copy. Dropping a
bare page beside ``world.md`` and running ``wiki update`` replays exactly how
``world.md`` itself came to be:

.. code-block:: console

   $ cp -r examples/hello /tmp/hello
   $ cd /tmp/hello
   $ printf '# Another\n\nA second page.\n' > another.md
   $ wiki update
   Adopted 1 bare page (frontmatter added)
   Added 1 new link
   Updated 2 files.

The update adopts the bare page (frontmatter added, ``title: Another`` seeded
from its H1) and adds an index row with the ``...`` placeholder description.
``wiki lint`` now reports the placeholder as a soft note — notes go to stderr
and never affect the exit code:

.. code-block:: console

   $ wiki lint
   another.md: Needs desc
   No issues found (1 note).

Author a real ``desc:`` in ``another.md``'s frontmatter and run
``wiki update`` again to propagate it into the index row. The full sync
behavior —
what update owns, rewrites, and leaves alone — is covered in
:doc:`/guide/generation`; to scaffold a wiki of your own, start at
:doc:`/guide/getting-started`.
